---
layout: post
title: "What Makes a Data Scientist - Part 3"
subtitle: "Finding Unicorns in the Midwest"
description: "A real Data Scientist is part developer, mathematician, data monger, big data engineer, data visualization master, creative thinker, and domain expert, and very hard to find."
header-img: "img/mon-chesterfield.jpg"
authors:
    -
        name: "Seth Dobrin"
        githubProfile : "dr-seth"
        twitterHandle : "sdobrin"
        avatarUrl : "https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/9697696?v=3"
tags: [data scientist, data, analytics]
---

Reposted from [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/what-makes-data-scientist-finding-unicorns-midwest-seth-dobrin-phd?trk=prof-post).

The role of Data Scientist is often ill defined. A real Data Scientist
is part developer, mathematician, data monger, big data engineer, data
visualization master, creative thinker, and domain expert. The way I
look at is she knows more math than a developer and is a better coder
than your current analytics team. She can visualize data better than a
big data engineer and can build a data system better than any data viz
team. She has more domain expertise than a business analysts or
product owner and is more adept at defining capabilities than your
business partner. Finally, she can think about data in unique ways and
create previously unrealized value from data. This is the unicorn. You
may already have one or two under your nose or you may have have "Data
Scientists" on your team that actually aren't.

Combine this with the relative newness of formal data science training
programs and it is no wonder that finding true a Data Scientist has
been likened to finding unicorns. On the left or right coast this can
be challenging enough, now apply this to the Midwest. Similar to any
software decision, you have two main options: build or buy. Or in this
case, look outside and recruit for talent or invest in your current
talent pool. Both options come with their own set of challenges.

With the option of buy/hire, the pool of true Data Scientists is
small, but applying the requirement for domain knowledge can make the
pool dry up entirely, especially in our focus of agriculture. On top
of that is the challenge of location. Attracting these individuals to
perceived less desirable locations like the Midwest (which, by the
way, is a really nice place to live even having grown up on the right
coast and having lived on the left coast for more than a decade)
creates even steeper barriers. You can look at remote employees, but
historically, large companies have not been good at this and are just
learning how to do this effectively while still providing
opportunities for development and career growth. With the right focus,
role definition and willingness to invest in expanding their domain
knowledge, this is not an insurmountable challenge

The other option of build, or developing the current talent pool, has
a separate set of challenges. Is the current talent pool even capable
of developing the needed skill set? With the current work load how do
you help her find time at work to add the necessary skills to her
arsenal?  On the up side, she likely is already located where you want
her and she is more likely to have a base of necessary domain
expertise. With a willingness to carve out time and pay for
development, combined with identifying those in your current pool with
the desire and potential to develop these skills, this is not an
intractable course of action either.

Not surprisingly, the most correct course is a mixture of both.

**Bringing in external talent.** Start by identifying those critical
spots that you want to find a true Data Scientist and perhaps lack
specific domain or technical expertise. Be prepared to spend the
time. Create an intriguing role highlighting the challenges and the
opportunities. Smart people want to tackle large, multidimensional
challenges. Define the role with a menu of requirements: two from this
category, four from that category and stick to it, don't
compromise. Unlike other roles where you can likely set you recruiter
loose, you need to take an active role in identifying the candidates
and building a relationship with them. Help them understand your data,
your challenges, and the opportunity for them. Most importantly, be
patient and, again, don't compromise.

**Investing in existing talent.** It is unlikely that your entire
current team will be able to master the necessary skills to grow into
Data Scientists. Just like when looking externally, spend the time to
build relationships with your team. Understand your team members and
their capabilities and desires. Once you find that handful who have
the desire and ability, be clear about your expectations and clearly
define the new roles and new opportunities. There are a lot of online
resources for your teams, both free and paid. Take advantage of
these. Similar to attracting good talent, set a menu of skills that
are needed and work with you team and your leaders to set a clear path
to success. Some will succeed and some will not, you need to be okay
with that.

Buying or building, that's the historical software trade off. When
establishing a team of true Data Scientists, you face a similar
question of hire externally or develop internal talent. The most
correct answer is a combination of both. Looking externally and
developing talent both take time and resources. Neither is a silver
bullet, but both need to be approached with a no compromise attitude
and clear expectations. Finding or helping to create that unicorn
takes direct involvement and commitment from top executives, managers,
and the people doing the work. In either case, make sure you are not
just gluing a horn on to a mule can calling it a unicorn. Through hard
work, the truly talented team members will have fun _and_ create
value.
