---
layout: post
title: "What Makes a Data Scientist - Part 1"
subtitle: "Really, what is a Data Scientist?"
description: "When having conversations about data and analytics, the new fad is hiring Data Scientists. But I find that most people don't know what that means, and most people we call Data Scientists are not."
header-img: "img/mon-ankeny.jpg"
authors:
    -
        name: "Seth Dobrin"
        githubProfile : "dr-seth"
        twitterHandle : "sdobrin"
        avatarUrl : "https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/9697696?v=3"
tags: [data scientist, data, analytics]
---

Reposted from [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/what-makes-data-scientist-part-1-seth-dobrin?trk=prof-post).

When having conversations about data and analytics, the new fad is
hiring Data Scientists. But I find that most people don't know what
that means, and most people we call Data Scientists are not.
Typically, individuals who are called Data Scientists fall into one of
three camps.  The first and least prevalent is a real Data
Scientist. The second camp is composed of database engineers,
architects, or data analysts. And the third is comprised of
statisticians and/or mathematicians. That's not to say that the two
latter camps can't become Data Scientists, but to do so requires a
willingness to learn and take risks, as well as an investment in time
by the individual and her employer.

So what is a Data Scientist? She is an individual who possesses domain
knowledge in a relevant area, a spectrum of skills and experiences
that range from raw data architecture to what I will call data
journalism.  Perhaps even more importantly this breadth of skills and
experiences needs to be with modern, relevant technologies and
techniques. These skills and experiences are as follows and in future
posts I will dig into what each of these mean and why some combination
of them are required. The specific categories of skills and
experiences are as follows: database architecture & engineering, data
intake & transformation, ontology & metadata, statistical
transformation & analytics foundation, descriptive analytics &
reporting, model-based analytics and finally data journalism. Data
Scientists are the data and analytics version of an Agile Development
team member with E-shaped skills. This means she should have a depth
of skills in 2-3 areas, a breadth of skills that spans most of the
gamut of skills listed above and the ability to execute. If you have
separate data and analytics teams in your organization, you need Data
Scientists in both organizations. The depth of her skills in
descriptive analytics & reporting determines which group she belongs
in, a data team or an analytics team.

As mentioned above the skills and experiences need to be with relevant
and modern technologies and techniques. What do I mean by this? A Data
Scientist possesses an understanding of legacy type platforms, such as
relation databases management systems (RDBMS) and data warehouses
(DW), and she is able to manage processes such as extract, transform
and load (ETL). Additionally, she will have a foundation in
traditional supervised and unsupervised statistical methods. While
these are valuable skills and an important part of her toolbox, they
are only the beginning. Her toolbox should also consist of an
understanding and depth of skill in the so called "Not only SQL", or
NoSQL, platforms. Theses include columnar data stores, document
stores, key-value stores, graph databases, and finally multi-model
databases.  More modern analytics skill include techniques such as
machine learning, neural networks, and operational research.  To
leverage most of these modern tools, she needs to know at least one
programming language, and preferably more, such as Python, R, Java, or
Scala.  All of these skills and experiences should be on web-scale,
cloud-based environments.

Wow what a list and what expectations! It is important to remember
that very few people, if any, will master the entire spectrum of
skills, platforms, and techniques. What is important is that anyone
you call a Data Scientist has a breadth of skills and experiences that
span from data architecture to data journalism with depth in at least
2-3 areas. As technologies change it is important that they be a
learner so they can maintain their understanding of relevant
technologies.
