---
layout: post
title: "What Makes a Data Scientist - Part 2"
subtitle: "The Role of Teams"
description: "A colleague of mine eloquently and rightfully declares that &quot;if one person or one team can solve a problem by themselves, it is probably not a problem worth solving.&quot;"
header-img: "img/mon-maui.jpg"
authors:
    -
        name: "Seth Dobrin"
        githubProfile : "dr-seth"
        twitterHandle : "sdobrin"
        avatarUrl : "https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/9697696?v=3"
tags: [data scientist, data, analytics]
---

Reposted from [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/what-makes-data-scientist-part-2-role-teams-seth-dobrin?trk=prof-post).

A colleague of mine eloquently and rightfully declares that "if one
person or one team can solve a problem by themselves, it is probably
not a problem worth solving." Given this context, as a follow on to my
post "[What Makes a Data Scientist - Part 1][part1]," it is fitting to
explore the role of teams in defining a Data Scientist. As discussed
in the first post, the spectrum of skills that a Data Scientist needs
to posses is too vast for a single person to be an expert in all. As
part of a team she will lead a group of individuals who have more
depth than her in some areas and less in others. How she utilizes and
leverages that team as well as her ability to reach across functional
boundaries will define the level of success her and her team actually
attain.

[part1]: http://engineering.monsanto.com/2015/11/09/what-makes-a-data-scientist-part-1/

Based on the spectrum of work a Data Scientist does she can actually
land in two different organizations: an analytics team or a data team,
both of which should have Data Scientists. The expectation for Data
Scientists varies depending on which side of the fence she lands. The
team with a data-focused Data Scientist is responsible for data
architecture, data engineering, data intake, data transformation,
ontology, metadata, statistical transformation, and descriptive
analytics & reporting. A Data Scientist who lands on the
analytics-focused team is responsible for descriptive analytics,
model-based analytics, and data journalism. This is a critical point,
if the Data Scientist building the model were responsible for doing
this foundational work on the data, her natural inclination would be
to bring it together to solve her problem. The outcome of having a
separate team led by Data Scientists focused on the data is that the
data can then be managed with the broader enterprise in mind and not
just the problem at hand.

To be clear, one person is not expected to be an expert in all of
these areas regardless of which side of the fence she lands. The
expectation is that she has a solid understanding of the spectrum and
depth in at least 2-3 areas, as well as the ability to execute (the
concept of "E-shaped" skills). The Data Scientist cannot be the only
one with an E-shaped skill set, her entire team must have this type of
skill set as well. If you are familiar with Agile development
concepts, think of the Data Scientist as Data and Analytics Product
Owner (PO) and the others as "Team Members". With this structure you
can build Agile teams of 3-4 individuals that possess the necessary
spectrum of skills and domain expertise.

Since my current focus is leading a data team, I am going to focus on
the Data Scientist that is on the data side of the fence. In this
example she must be able to lead and direct her team as well as work
across organizational boundaries. Her role in this position is to
understand the data and understand the application of these data to
solve a complex modeling problem. Leveraging her domain expertise, she
works with the analytics team to understand its problem and put it in
the context of the larger organization. To do this the team needs to
architect and engineer the solution based on a set of use cases. While
the solution is being architected and engineered, the team needs to
identify, source, consume, and transform the data. The team also needs
to ensure the data have appropriate context in the form of an ontology
and metadata. This is important in building a reusable enterprise data
asset. Essentially, under her guidance the team must prepare the data
and _publish_ it to the Enterprise in such a way that it stands on its
own. This last part is where her foundation in analytics comes
in. Additionally, her depth of knowledge in statistical
transformation, descriptive analytics, and reporting comes in to play
at this point.

Data sets are a commodity, but unlike other commodities data sets are
reusable. Even more importantly, the value of data multiplies with
every use. Data gains value when leveraged by analytical models. These
models are simultaneously generating new data and driving decisions. A
Data Scientist maximizes her value when she treats data as a reusable
commodity for the enterprise. By building and nurturing these data
assets she enables reuse of the data for application development,
other analytical questions, and reporting. Circling back to the
statement "if one person or one team can solve a problem by themselves
it is probably not a problem worth solving," having an Agile team
built around the spectrum of data science skills is critical to
addressing decisions that deliver real business value for an
organization while simultaneously building a repertoire of reusable
data assets.
